Adding anova.mmrm (#519)
openpharma/mmrm: design/adding_anova_to_mmrm_design_document.qmd

---
title: "Adding anova() to mmrm"
author: "Nik Krieger"
format: gfm
editor: visual
---

## Setup

```{r setup}
library(mmrm)
library(tidyverse)
set.seed(20250708)

> data <-

Reviewer: let's go with a simpler example that does not refer to the other tutorial (which is not available to others here)

Author: Yes, I agree. It dawned on me that there is no upside to using the tutorial's example in this repo

  select(FEV1, AVISIT, VISITX, VISITN, TIMEX, TIMEN, TIMEF, USUBJID, ARMCD,
         RACE, SEX)
basis <- splines::ns(data$TIMEX, df = 2, Boundary.knots = c(0, max(data$TIMEX)))
spline <- function(TIMEX, column) {
  as.numeric(predict(basis, TIMEX)[, column])
}
```

# Background

A current drawback of `mmrm` is that it does not support `stats::anova()` (i.e., `anova.mmrm()` does not exist). This is discussed here: <https://github.com/openpharma/mmrm/issues/164>

## Key points from the GitHub issue

The title of the issue is centered on incorporating the Likelihood Ratio Test for `mmrm` fits: "\[feature request\] add likelihood ratio test."

There is consensus that this goal of obtaining LRT results would be available via a new `anova()` method for `mmrm` model fits.

### Models should be compared to check if they are nested:

-   Nested sets of covariates. See: <https://github.com/openpharma/mmrm/issues/164#issuecomment-1446364890>
-   "Nested" covariance structures (e.g., unstructured + any structured; AR1 being a special case of Toeplitz). See: <https://github.com/openpharma/mmrm/issues/164#issuecomment-1446627674> and the **Nested covariance structures proofs** appendix below.

> -   **Not both** of the above, as this would be too complicated.

Author: Done

-   `test` argument to opt in/out of obtaining LRT results (see `?nlme::anova.lme`). The function will return degrees of freedom, AIC, BIC, and log-likelihood regardless.
-   `refit` arguments to allow for refitting the models (see `?lme4::anova.merMod`).

# Prerequisite: augment `logLik.mmrm_tmb()`

This function needs to return more data in the `attributes()` of the returned value:

-   `nall`, `nobs`, and `df`
-   Add `"logLik"` to the `class()` of the returned value

Prototype:

```{r}
#' @describeIn mmrm_tmb_methods obtains the attained log likelihood value.
#' @importFrom stats logLik
#' @exportS3Method
#' @examples
#' # Log likelihood given the estimated parameters:
#' logLik(object)
logLik.mmrm_tmb <- function(object, ...) {
  out <- -component(object, "neg_log_lik")

  # total number of observations
  nall <- component(object, "n_obs")

  # was REML used (ML was used if FALSE)
  reml_used <- component(object, "reml")

  # Number of estimated coefficients (excluding aliased coefficients)
  n_fixed_effects <- length(component(object, "beta_est"))

  # Adjusted number of observations when REML is used

>   nobs <- nall - reml_used * n_fixed_effects

Reviewer: Hm then maybe let's drop those

  # Number of parameters

>   df <- component(object, "n_theta")

Author: I believe this is fixed. However, I did not add the "fixed sigma patch" because it didn't seem to me that `mmrm()` has this option. Let me know if I'm mistaken.

## Function outline

### Plain language

#### Special case: supplying only one model fit

If the user provides only one model fit to `anova.mmrm()`, the function will calculate and return the significance of the model terms in a data frame.

#### Comparing multiple model fits

If the user provides more than one model fit, a data frame is produced with a row for each model, and the columns will contain identifying information as well as standard diagnostics (e.g., AIC; log likelihood).

If the user supplied `test = TRUE`, the model fits are subject to further tests to ensure they are nestable. If the data sets for the fits are not the same and the user supplied `refit = TRUE`, the data sets are harmonized and the models are refitted using the harmonized data set. The pairs of models then undergo likelihood ratio testing, and the results are augmented into the data frame of results.

### Prototype code

#### `anova.mmrm()`

```{r }
anova.mmrm <- function (object, ..., test = TRUE, refit = FALSE) {
  checkmate::assert_class(object, "mmrm")
  
  # If there are objects supplied to "..."

>   if (...length()) {

Reviewer: interesting that this works!
But still better to keep it readable:
```suggestion
  extra_args <- list(...)
  if (length(extra_args)) {
```

Reviewer: and adapt accordingly below

Author: `...length()` is a base function that returns the number of arguments supplied to `...`. But if it's too obscure then we can certainly grab the elements with `list(...)` as you suggest.

Reviewer: Yes please, it is more common

Author: Done

      fits <- h_fits_data_identical(fits, refit = TRUE)
    }
  
    LL_vec <- lapply(fits, logLik.mmrm_tmb)
    fit_calls <- lapply(fits, component, "call")
    
    # Calculate the standard diagnostics.
    out <-
      data.frame(
        call = vapply(fit_calls, deparse1, character(1L)),
        Model = seq_along(fits),
        df = vapply(LL_vec, attr, FUN.VALUE = numeric(1L), "df"), 
        AIC = vapply(fits, AIC, numeric(1)),
        BIC = vapply(fits, BIC, numeric(1)),
        logLik = as.numeric(LL_vec)
      )
    
    # If the user has requested the likelihood ratio test...
    if (test) {
      # First iterate through and check the models to make sure their covariates
      # and covariance structures are nested
      for (i in seq_along(fits)[-1L]) {
        h_assert_nested_models(fits[[i - 1L]], fits[[i]])
      }
      
      if (!refit && !h_fits_data_identical(fits, refit = FALSE)) {
        stop("Not all data sets underlying the model fits are identical and ",
             "refit = FALSE.", call. = FALSE)
      }
      
      # Label for the pair being compared (e.g., "3 vs 4")
      out$test <- c(NA, paste(head(out$Model, -1), "vs", tail(out$Model, -1)))
      

>       # Calculate the likelihood ratio between the pairs using base::diff()
>       out$likelihood_ratio <- c(NA, diff(out$logLik))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      # Calculate the log of likelihood ratios between the pairs using base::diff()
      out$log_likelihood_ratio <- c(NA, diff(out$logLik))
```

      
      # Calculate the p-value using the ratios and differences in df
      out$p_value <-
        pchisq(

>           2 * abs(out$likelihood_ratio),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          2 * abs(out$log_likelihood_ratio),
```

          df = abs(diff(out$df)), 
          lower.tail = FALSE
        )
    }
    
  } else { 
    

>     # attributes of terms.object for the model formula without the cov struct

Reviewer: the term wise testing probably makes sense to factor out in a small dedicated helper function

    terms <- c(if (terms_attr$intercept) "(Intercept)", terms_attr$term.labels)
    
    # Vector identifying each coefficient's corresponding term
    assign_vec <- attr(component(object, "x_matrix"), "assign")
    
    # Create an identity matrix with a row/col for each coefficient
    identity_mtx <- diag(length(assign_vec))
    
    # Split the rows of identity_mtx according to assign_vec, creating a list of
    # contrast matrices: one for each term in the model.
    contrasts <-
      split.data.frame(identity_mtx, factor(assign_vec, labels = terms))
    
    # Get df_md() results for each contrast matrix. Result is a list of lists
    df_md_results <- lapply(contrasts, df_md, object = object)
    
    # Turn results into a data frame. The row.names identify the terms.
    out <- do.call(rbind, lapply(df_md_results, as.data.frame))
  }
  
  out
}
```

#### Supporting functions:

```{r}
# Compares the data sets underlying a list of fits. 

# If refit = FALSE, this is a predicate function indicating whether all the data
# sets are the same.

# If refit = TRUE, all data sets are harmonized, the models are refit using the

> # harmonized data set, and the refits are returned.

Reviewer: It adds complexity that this function returns different things depending on one argument. Can you refactor such that we have the overall flow:

1) `h_check_same_data()` - whether the data sets are the same or not
2) if not the same and not refit -> error
3) if not the same and refit ->
 a) `h_smallest_common_data()` returns smallest common data set included in all fits (and not the largest data set e.g.)
b) `h_refit_on_data()` refits all models on this smallest common data set
4) if the same -> all good

      } else {
        # If we're not refitting, just return FALSE
        return(FALSE)
      }
      
    }
  }
  
  if (refit) {
    
    if (all_data_same) {
      # If all data were the same, return the original model fits
      out <- fits
    } else {
      # Otherwise, refit the models and return
      out <- Map(h_refit_mmrm_with_data, fits, dfs, MoreArgs = list(data))
    }
    
  } else {
    # If we aren't refitting and we've gotten this far, return TRUE
    out <- TRUE
  }
  
  out
}

# Refit a single model using a new data set. Does not refit if original data is
# the same as the new data.
h_refit_mmrm_with_data <- function(fit, current_df, new_df) {
  # If the model fit's current data set is not the same as the new one...
  if (!identical(current_df, new_df)) {
    # Grab the model call and replace its "data" argument with the new data
    expr <- component(fit, "call")
    expr[["data"]] <- new_df
    # Grab the environment of the model's formula
    envir <- environment(fit[["formula_parts"]][["full_formula"]])
    # Evaluate the model call in the environment of the original fit's formula
    fit <- eval(call, envir)
  }

  fit
}

> # Compares two models to see if they are properly nested.

Reviewer: btw we also need to think about the use of the REML vs. ML fits. probably easiest to just assert that always the same method was used for the fit. I would not bother to cater for the unlikely case that sometimes REML and sometimes ML was used and then refit, that is too rare and makes things more complex

Author: To reference the description of the `refit` argument found in `?lme4::anova.merMod` again:

> logical indicating if objects of class lmerMod should be refitted with ML before comparing models. The default is TRUE to prevent the common mistake of inappropriately comparing REML-fitted models with different fixed effects, whose likelihoods are not directly comparable.

It seems that the original purpose of the `refit` argument in `lme4:::anova.merMod()` was to allow the refitting of REML models. 

Can we make it so that `refit = TRUE` gives the function permission to refit models with the same data AND to also refit any REML models?

```
if (refit) {

  if (different_data_sets(fit)) {
    fits <- refit_all_with_new_data_and_ML(fits)
  } else if (any_REML_models(fit)) {
    fits <- refit_REML_models_with_ML(fits)

} else {
  error if not all data same
  error if any REML present
}
```

Reviewer: We don't necessarily need to match lme4 behavior here. In MMRMs so far I have only ever seen REML been used in practice. Therefore I would prefer to focus only on datasets when refitting

Author: I have made it so that `refit` only applies when the data sets are different.

Just checking—does the assertion in `?lme4::anova.merMod` apply here (viz., you can't compare REML models with different fixed effects)? I suppose the question behind my question is whether models with nested covariates have "different" fixed effects.

Reviewer: Yes, thanks indeed it applies here, see my comment above

Author: Changed accordingly; use comment thread above for further discussion.

                                   model_augmented_name =
                                     vname(model_augmented)) {
  model_basic <- model_basic[["formula_parts"]]
  model_augmented <- model_augmented[["formula_parts"]]

  if (!identical(model_basic[["visit_var"]], model_augmented[["visit_var"]])) {
    stop(model_basic_name, " and ", model_augmented_name,
         " must have the same visit variable.")
  }

  if (!identical(model_basic[["subject_var"]], model_augmented[["subject_var"]])) {
    stop(model_basic_name, " and ", model_augmented_name,
         " must have the same subject variable.")
  }

  if (!identical(model_basic[["group_var"]], model_augmented[["group_var"]])) {
    stop(model_basic_name, " and ", model_augmented_name,
         " must have the same grouping variable.")
  }

  switch(
    h_check_covar_nesting(model_basic, model_augmented),
    "identical" = 
      if (
        h_check_cov_struct_nesting(model_basic, model_augmented) == "identical"
      ) {
        warning("Models have identical covariates and covariance structures.")
      },
    "nested" = 
      if (
        h_check_cov_struct_nesting(model_basic, model_augmented) == "nested"
      ) {

>         stop("Models cannot have both nested covariates and nested covariance structures.",

Reviewer: this should be allowed now that I changed my mind, see above

  # type in mmrm
  cov_struct_nesting <-
    list(
      ad = c("adh", "us"),
      adh = "us",
      ar1 = c("ad", "adh", "ar1h", "toep", "toeph", "us"),
      ar1h = c("adh", "toeph", "us"),
      cs = c("csh", "toep", "toeph", "us"),
      csh = c("toeph", "us"),
      toep = c("toeph", "us"),
      toeph = "us",
      us = character(0L),
      sp_exp = character(0L)
    )
  
  if (identical(basic_cov_struct, aug_cov_struct)) {
    "identical"
  } else if (any(cov_struct_nesting[[aug_cov_struct]] == basic_cov_struct)) {
    "nested"
  } else {
    stop(
      "The covariance structure of ", aug_name,
      " must be identical to or a special case of the covariance structure of ",
      basic_name, ". The covariance structure ", aug_cov_struct,
      " is not a special case of ", basic_cov_struct, ".",
      call. = FALSE
    )
  }
}

# Sorts a data frame's columns alphabetically, then sorts its rows by each
# column in order
h_df_sort_all <- function(df) {
  cols <- sort(colnames(df))
  Reduce(function(df, col) df[order(df[[col]]), ], rev(cols), init = df[cols])
}
```

# Examples

Using a modified version of the `fit_reduced` and `fit_full` models in the tutorial:

> ```{r}

Reviewer: currently this example shows a case where the df are the same for the two models (note that this won't be the case anymore after correcting the d.f. definition above). but it is interesting because in that case the models cannot be nested. That could also be a simple first step in the nesting function above : for nesting, the d.f. of the first model must be strictly smaller than the d.f. of the second model.

Author: Once `logLik.mmrm_tmb()` correctly calculates and reports `df` (which is hopefully now), is the current nesting assertion (covariates and covariance structure) sufficient?

Author: I have now done so. When LRT is requested (i.e., `test = TRUE`), degrees of freedom are now compared before anything else.

I did notice the edge case in which there are only 1 or 2 timepoints (i.e., $m=1$ or $m=2$), two models with identical covariates and nested covariance structures can have the same number of degrees of freedom. For instance, when $m=2$ and using `toeph`:

$$
N_{params} = m(m+1)/2 = 2(2+1)/2 = 3
$$ 

And if using `us`, then:

$$
N_{params} = 2m - 1 = 2\cdot 2 - 1 = 3
$$

This will result in the two models having the same degrees of freedom even though they are nested but not identical. Should these two models indeed not be allowed to be compared via LRT?

Reviewer: Yes, correct, in that case they should not be allowed to be compared via LRT. So LRT comparison is valid if 1) covariates are nested, 2) covariance is nested, and 3) at least one d.f. difference.

Author: Cool, then the current code accomplishes this.

---
title: "Adding anova() to mmrm"
author: "Nik Krieger"
format: gfm
editor: visual
---

## Setup

```{r setup}
library(mmrm)
```

# Background

A current drawback of `mmrm` is that it does not support `stats::anova()` (i.e., `anova.mmrm()` does not exist). This is discussed here: <https://github.com/openpharma/mmrm/issues/164>

## Key points from the GitHub issue

The title of the issue is centered on incorporating the Likelihood Ratio Test for `mmrm` fits: "\[feature request\] add likelihood ratio test."

There is consensus that this goal of obtaining LRT results would be available via a new `anova()` method for `mmrm` model fits.

### Models should be compared to check if they are nested:

> -   Nested sets of covariates. See: <https://github.com/openpharma/mmrm/issues/164#issuecomment-1446364890>

Author: This is in the section that distills key points from the GitHub issue, which doesn't mention REML nor ML. Should I still include this here? Or should I add some language into the **Additional considerations** section that adds nuance?

> -   Nested sets of covariates. See: <https://github.com/openpharma/mmrm/issues/164#issuecomment-1446364890>

Reviewer: Yeah additional considerations is also fine. The issue was just a starting point. We have evolved from there already 😄

> -   "Nested" covariance structures (e.g., unstructured + any structured; AR1 being a special case of Toeplitz). See: <https://github.com/openpharma/mmrm/issues/164#issuecomment-1446627674> and the **Nested covariance structures proofs** appendix below.

Reviewer: for REML or ML

> -   **Not both** of the above, as this would be too complicated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Both of the above, but only for ML estimated models
```

Reviewer: let's not worry about the issue details anymore - now that we started the work, things have changed

Author: Done. Ready for you to take another look.

## Additional considerations

### Providing only one fit to `anova.mmrm()`

`?stats::anova` declares that if only one model fit is provided, the function will calculate the significance of model terms. The `anova.mmrm()` should honor this.

### Following the lead of `anova()` methods in `nlme` and `lme4`

In order that `anova.mmrm()` may be comparable to `anova()` methods in the `nlme` and `lme4` packages, it shall contain the following arguments:

-   `test` argument to opt in/out of obtaining LRT results (see `?nlme::anova.lme`). The function will return degrees of freedom, AIC, BIC, and log-likelihood regardless.
-   `refit` arguments to allow for refitting the models (see `?lme4::anova.merMod`).

# Prerequisite: augment `logLik.mmrm_tmb()`

This function needs to return more data in the `attributes()` of the returned value:

-   `df`: the degrees of freedom shall be returned as an attribute.
    -   If REML estimation was used, it shall equal the number of parameters.

>     -   If ML estimation was used, it shall equal the sum of the number of parameters and the number of estimated coefficients.

Author: Done.

-   Add `"logLik"` to the `class()` of the returned value

Prototype:

```{r}
#' @describeIn mmrm_tmb_methods obtains the attained log likelihood value.
#' @param complete (`logical`)\cr Indicates whether or not to include aliased
#'  coefficients set to `NA`.
#' @importFrom stats logLik
#' @exportS3Method
#' @examples
#' # Log likelihood given the estimated parameters:
#' logLik(object)
logLik.mmrm_tmb <- function(object, complete = TRUE, ...) {
  out <- -component(object, "neg_log_lik")

  # Number of parameters
  n_params <- component(object, "n_theta")

  # REML
  if (component(object, "reml")) {
    df <- n_params
  } else {
    # ML
    # Number of estimated coefficients
    n_fixed_effects <-
      length(

>         component(object, if (complete) "beta_est_complete" else "beta_est")

Reviewer: Hm yeah I think that is the case. Just use `coef(complete = FALSE)` then

    
    # If the data are not all the same and refit = TRUE, refit all with the 
    # largest common data set
    if (refit && !h_check_fits_all_data_same(fits)) {
      common_data <- h_fits_common_data(fits)

>       refit_lgl <- 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      needs_refit <- 
```

        !vapply(
          lapply(fits, h_get_minimal_fit_data), 
          h_check_columns_nested,
          FUN.VALUE = logical(1L),
          data_augmented = common_data
        )

>       fits[refit_lgl] <-

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      fits[need_refit] <-
```

        lapply(fits[refit_lgl], h_refit_mmrm, data = common_data)
    } else {

>       refit_lgl <- rep_len(FALSE, length(fits))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      need_refit <- rep_len(FALSE, length(fits))
```

Author: done

    }
    
    # vector of log likelihood results for the fits
    logLik_vec <- lapply(fits, logLik.mmrm_tmb)
    
    # Calculate the standard diagnostics.
    out <-
      data.frame(
        Model = seq_along(fits),

>         refit = refit_lgl,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        refit = need_refit,
```

Author: done
